# Access Control (ACL)


### When is Basic Authorization used vs. Bearer Authorization?
* The Basic and Digest authentication schemes are dedicated to the authentication using a username and a secret (see RFC7616 and RFC7617). The Bearer authentication scheme is dedicated to the authentication using a token and is described by the RFC6750

### What does the JSON Web Token package do?
* JSON Web Token (JWT) is an open standard (RFC 7519) that defines a compact and self-contained way for securely transmitting information between parties as a JSON object. This information can be verified and trusted because it is digitally signed.


### What considerations should we make when creating and storing a SECRET?
* Secrets management refers to the tools and methods for managing digital authentication credentials (secrets), including passwords, keys, APIs, and tokens for use in applications, services, privileged accounts and other sensitive parts of the IT ecosystem.

### encryption
* a means of securing digital data using one or more mathematical techniques, along with a password or “key” used to decrypt the information

### token
* used in bearer authentication, a token is a cryptic string that is generated by the server in response to a login request

### bearer
* A type of token used for authentication - represents the user

### secret
* A secret ket or passcode used to login or create a login/token

### JSON Web Token
* JSON web tokens are used to securely transmit data between parties as JSON objects

### RBAC
* RBAC is the idea of assigning system access to users based on their role in an organization. It’s important to remember that not every employee needs a starring role.

### five-step approach to getting it implemented
1. Inventory your systems.// Figure out what resources you have for which you need to control access, if you don't already have them listed. Examples would include an email system, customer database, contact management system, major folders on a file server, etc.
2. Analyze your workforce and create roles.// 
You need to group your workforce members into roles with common access needs.  Avoid the temptation to have too many roles defined. Keep them as simple and stratified as possible.
3. Assign people to roles.// Now that you have a list of roles and their access rights, figure out which role(s) each employee belongs in, and set their access accordingly.

4. Never make one-off changes.// Resist any temptation to make a one-off change for an employee with unusual needs. If you begin doing this, your RBAC system will quickly begin to unravel. Change the roles as required or add new ones when really necessary.

5. Audit.// Periodically review your roles, the employees assigned to them, and the access permitted for each. If you discover, for example, that a role has unnecessary access to a particular system, change the role and adjust the access level for all employees in that role.

